Translog architecture guide Distributed team (#126416)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/internal/DistributedArchitectureGuide.md

[`TranslogReader`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/TranslogReader.java
[`TranslogSnapshot`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/TranslogSnapshot.java
[`MultiSnapshot`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/MultiSnapshot.java
[`TranslogWriter`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/TranslogWriter.java

Each translog is a sequence of files, each identified by a translog generation ID, each containing a sequence of operations, with the last file open for writes.
The last file has a part which has been fsync'ed to disk, and a part which has been written but not necessarily fsync'ed yet to disk.
Each operation is identified by a sequence number (`seqno`), which is monotonically increased by the engine's ingestion functionality.
Typically the entries in the translog are in increasing order of their sequence number, but not necessarily.

> A [`Checkpoint`] file is also maintained, which is written on each fsync operation of the translog, and records important metadata and statistics about the translog, such as the current translog generation ID, its last fsync'ed operation and location, the minimum translog generation ID, and the minimum and maximum sequence number of operations the sequence of translog generations include, all of which are useful to identify the translog operations needed to be replayed upon recovery.

Reviewer: It's more than just "useful", this is essential for correctness. The `Checkpoint` records the last fsynced location in the translog file, i.e. it is safe to read up to the location in the checkpoint but beyond that point are only dragons.

Author: Reworded, thanks!

### Translog

[Basic write model]:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/docs-replication.html

It is important to understand first the [Basic write model] of documents:
documents are written to Lucene in-memory buffers, then "refreshed" to searchable segments which may not be persisted on disk, and finally "flushed" to a durable Lucene commit on disk.

> This means that newly ingested data may be lost if there is an outage before the next persisted commit on disk.

Reviewer: I think this sentence should be more conditional, and also it would be possible to do this without a translog if we just accepted high latency on write responses. Something like this perhaps?

```suggestion
If this were the only way we stored the data, we would have to delay the response to every write request until after the data had been flushed to disk, which could take many seconds or longer. If we didn't, it'd mean that we would lose newly-ingested data if there were an outage between sending the response and flushing the data to disk.
```

> For this reason, newly ingested data is also written to a shard's `[Translog](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/Translog.java)`, whose main purpose is to persist uncommitted operations (e.g., document insertions or deletions), so they can be replayed in the event of ephemeral failures such as a crash or power loss.

Reviewer: Putting the link inside the backticks renders incorrectly, you need the backticks inside the square brackets instead (here and throughout).

Consider also using the footnote-style links like elsewhere in the doc, rather than clogging up the plaintext source with URLs.

The translog is always persisted and fsync'ed on disk before acknowledging writes back to the user.
This can be seen in `[InternalEngine](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/engine/InternalEngine.java)` which calls the `add()` method of the translog to append operations, e.g., its `index()` method at some point adds a document insertion operation to the translog.

> The translog ultimately truncates operations once they have been flushed to disk by a Lucene commit.

Reviewer: ... indeed, in some sense the point of a "flush" is to clear out the translog.

* During recovery, an index shard can be recovered up to at least the last acknowledged operation by replaying the translog onto the last flushed commit of the shard.
* Facilitate real-time (m)GETs of documents without refreshing.

#### Translog Truncation

[Flush API]:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/indices-flush.html

Translog files are automatically truncated when they are no longer needed, specifically after all their operations have been persisted by Lucene commits on disk.
Lucene commits are initiated by flushes (e.g., with the index [Flush API]).

Flushes may also be automatically initiated by Elasticsearch, e.g., if the translog exceeds a configurable size ([`INDEX_TRANSLOG_FLUSH_THRESHOLD_SIZE_SETTING`](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/dd1db5031ee7fdac284753c0c3b096b0e981d71a/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/IndexSettings.java#L352)) or age ([`INDEX_TRANSLOG_FLUSH_THRESHOLD_AGE_SETTING`](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/dd1db5031ee7fdac284753c0c3b096b0e981d71a/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/IndexSettings.java#L370)), which ultimately truncates the translog as well.

> #### Acknowledging writes

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning here that we do this to amortize the cost of `fsync()` operations across all the writes?

Finally, the AfterWrite action of the [`TransportWriteAction`](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/action/support/replication/TransportWriteAction.java) will call [`indexShard.syncAfterWrite()`](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/387eef070c25ed57e4139158e7e7e0ed097c8c98/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/action/support/replication/TransportWriteAction.java#L548) which will put the last written translog [`Location`](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/693f3bfe30271d77a6b3147e4519b4915cbb395d/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/Translog.java#L977) of the bulk request into a [`AsyncIOProcessor`](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/common/util/concurrent/AsyncIOProcessor.java) that is responsible for gradually fsync'ing the Translog and notifying any waiters.

> Ultimately the bulk request is notified that the translog has fsync'ed passed the requested location, and can continue to acknowledge the bulk request.

Reviewer 2: Typo? "fsync'ed passed" -> "fsync'ed past"?

[`TranslogHeader`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/TranslogHeader.java
[`TranslogReader`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/TranslogReader.java
[`TranslogSnapshot`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/TranslogSnapshot.java
[`MultiSnapshot`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/MultiSnapshot.java
[`TranslogWriter`]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/TranslogWriter.java

Each translog is a sequence of files, each identified by a translog generation ID, each containing a sequence of operations, with the last file open for writes.
The last file has a part which has been fsync'ed to disk, and a part which has been written but not necessarily fsync'ed yet to disk.
Each operation is identified by a sequence number (`seqno`), which is monotonically increased by the engine's ingestion functionality.

> A [`Checkpoint`] file is also maintained, that contains, among other information, the current translog generation ID, and its last fsync'ed operation and location, the minimum translog generation ID, and the minimum and maximum sequence number of operations the sequence of translog generations include.

Author: Extended.

An [`Operation`] can be a document indexed, a document deletion, or a no-op operation.
A [`Snapshot`] iterator can be created to iterate over a range of requested operation sequence numbers read from the translog files.
The [`sync()`] method is the one that fsync's the current translog generation file to disk, and updates the checkpoint file with the last fsync'ed operation and location.
The [`rollGeneration()`] method is the one that rolls the translog, creating a new translog generation, e.g., called during an index flush.
The [`createEmptyTranslog()`] method creates a new translog, e.g., for a new empty index shard.
Each translog file starts with a [`TranslogHeader`] that is followed by translog operations.

Some internal classes used for reading and writing from the translog are the following.
A [`TranslogReader`] can be used to read operation bytes from a translog file.
A [`TranslogSnapshot`] can be used to iterate operations from a translog reader.
A [`MultiSnapshot`] can be used to iterate operations over multiple [`TranslogSnapshot`]s.
A [`TranslogWriter`] can be used to write operations to the translog.

> #### Real-time GETs from the translog

Author: Good point, added in the introduction:

> , so they can be replayed by just reading them sequentially from the translog during [recovery](#recovery) in the event of ephemeral failures such as a crash or power loss.

### Translog

[Basic write model]:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/docs-replication.html
[Translog]:https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/main/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/translog/Translog.java
[History retention]:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/index-modules-history-retention.html

It is important to understand first the [Basic write model] of documents:
documents are written to Lucene in-memory buffers, then "refreshed" to searchable segments which may not be persisted on disk, and finally "flushed" to a durable Lucene commit on disk.
This means that newly ingested data may be lost if there is an outage before the next persisted commit on disk.
For this reason, newly ingested data is also written to a shard's [Translog], whose main purpose is to persist uncommitted operations (e.g., document insertions or deletions), so they can be replayed in the event of ephemeral failures such as a crash or power loss.
The translog is always persisted and fsync'ed on disk before acknowledging writes back to the user.

> This can be seen in `InternalEngine` which calls the `add()` method of the translog to append operations, e.g., its `index()` method at some point adds a document insertion operation to the translog.

Reviewer 2: I've been linking to the public code for references like this. I had seen that as a pattern (linking to main branch for file-links and a specific revision for line-specific links), so I just followed it.

The translog ultimately truncates operations once they have been flushed to disk by a Lucene commit.

Main usages of the translog are:

* During recovery, an index shard can be recovered up to at least the last acknowledged operation by replaying the translog onto the last flushed commit of the shard.

> * During a replica recovery, it may recover some lost operations from the primary's translog if needed before falling back to a complete recovery of Lucene files from the primary.

Reviewer 2: Is this true, I thought I read something to the contrary? https://elastic.slack.com/archives/C06FWH2BGMS/p1741793855287379?thread_ts=1741787680.838199&cid=C06FWH2BGMS

* Facilitate real-time (m)GETs of documents without refreshing.

#### Translog Truncation

[Flush API]:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/indices-flush.html

Translog files are automatically truncated when they are no longer needed, specifically after all their operations have been persisted by Lucene commits on disk.
Lucene commits are initiated by flushes (e.g., with the index [Flush API]).

Flushes may also be automatically initiated by Elasticsearch, e.g., if the translog exceeds a configurable size (`INDEX_TRANSLOG_FLUSH_THRESHOLD_SIZE_SETTING`) or age (`INDEX_TRANSLOG_FLUSH_THRESHOLD_AGE_SETTING`),which ultimately truncates the translog as well.

#### Acknowledging writes

A bulk request will repeateadly call ultimately the Engine methods such as `index()` or `delete()` which adds operations to the Translog.

> Finally, the AfterWrite action of the `TransportWriteAction` will call `indexShard.syncAfterWrite()` which will put the last written transloc Location of the bulk request into a `AsyncIOProcessor` that is responsible for gradually fsync'ing the Translog and notifying any waiters.

Reviewer 3: "translog Location" or maybe `Translog.Location` here?
```suggestion
Finally, the AfterWrite action of the `TransportWriteAction` will call `indexShard.syncAfterWrite()` which will put the last written `Translog.Location` of the bulk request into a `AsyncIOProcessor` that is responsible for gradually fsync'ing the Translog and notifying any waiters.
```

A `Checkpoint` file is also maintained, that contains, among other information, the current translog generation ID, and its last fsync'ed operation and location, the minimum translog generation ID, and the minimum and maximum sequence number of operations the sequence of translog generations include.
When the translog rolls over, e.g., upon the translog file exceeding a configurable size, a new file in the sequence is created for writes, and the last one becomes read-only.
A new commit flushed to the disk will also induce a translog rollover, since the operations in the translog so far will become eligible for truncation.

A few more words on terminology and classes used around the translog Java package.
A `Location` of an operation is defined by the translog generation file it is contained in, the offset of the operation in that file, and the number of bytes that encode that operation.
An `Operation` can be a document indexed, a document deletion, or a no-op operation.
A `Snapshot` iterator can be created to iterate over a range of requested operation sequence numbers read from the translog files.

> A retention lock can be acquired for [History retention] purposes, e.g., for potentially facilitating a replica shard's recovery, which prohibits truncating the translog files.

Reviewer 2: I thought the retention lease tracked the earliest sequence number not replicated so that soft-deletes aren't purged past that point. i.e. that it's not about retaining the translog, but rather about preventing old versions of documents around.
This goes to my confusion above about the use of translog beyond local recovery.

Reviewer 4: That's my understanding as well assuming this is `org.elasticsearch.index.seqno.RetentionLease` that we are talking about. Though the comment [here](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/afe503f02fdf87036ba338ee98dd0495abe85ba1/server/src/main/java/org/elasticsearch/index/shard/IndexShard.java#L2632-L2637) does say "translog files" . So I am not entirely sure. I'd appreciate clarification. Thanks!

Author: See also my [reply here](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/126416/files#r2034159842), but you're right that currently the translog is NOT used for peer recovery and NO retention lock is ever acquired.

Note that in older days, this was not true. See [this PR](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/45136/files#diff-60a8d3503d000a2ab6617c09a69f61b000b3b262d68c674a75c2bf6534691d7aR2617) that removes acquiring a retention lock on the translog.

So removing this line from the PR. And adjusted the comment that Yang mentioned.

The `sync()` method is the one that fsync's the current translog generation file to disk, and updates the checkpoint file with the last fsync'ed operation and location.
The `rollGeneration()` method is the one that rolls the translog, creating a new translog generation, e.g., called during an index flush.
The `createEmptyTranslog()` method creates a new translog, e.g., for a new empty index shard.

> Each translog file starts with a `TranslogHeader` that is followed by translog operations.

Reviewer 2: I think links into the repo might be cool here?
